Cryptology is the science of making and breaking secret codes.
Cryptography is the development and use of codes. It is a way to store and transmit data so only the intended recipient can read or process it.
Cryptanalysis is the studying and breaking of codes.
Encryption is the process of scrambling data so that an unauthorized party cannot easily read it. Encryption converts the plaintext readable message to ciphertext, which is the unreadable, disguised message. Decryption reverses the process. Encryption also requires a key, which plays a critical role in encrypting and decrypting a message. The person possessing the key can decrypt the ciphertext to plaintext.
Julius Caesar is said to have secured messages by putting two sets of the alphabet, side-by-side, and then shifting one of them by a specific number of places. The number of places in the shift serves as the key. He converted plaintext into ciphertext using this key, and only his generals, who also had the key, knew how to decipher the messages. This method is the Caesar cipher.
We had other cipher methods that was in existence over centuries ago and they are; Scytale, Vigenere Cipher, Enigma machine. Encryption algorithm is only as good as the key used.
Each encryption method uses a specific algorithm, called a cipher, to encrypt and decrypt messages. A cipher is a series of well-defined steps used to encrypt and decrypt messages. There are several methods of creating ciphertext and they are;
Transposition – letters are rearranged
Substitution – letters are replaced 
One-time pad – plaintext combined with a secret key creates a new character, which then combines with the plaintext to produce ciphertext.
With most modern algorithms, successful decryption requires knowledge of the appropriate cryptographic keys. This means that the security of encryption lies in the secrecy of the keys, not the algorithm.
Key management is the most difficult part of designing a cryptosystem. In practice, most attacks on cryptographic systems involve attacking the key management system, rather than the cryptographic algorithm itself.
Types of Encryption: There are two types of encryption and they are; 
Symmetric algorithms - These algorithms use the same pre-shared key, sometimes called a secret key pair, to encrypt and decrypt data. Both the sender and receiver know the pre-shared key before any encrypted communication begins. This method are simpler and need less computational power. This method is also known as private-key encryption.
Asymmetric algorithms - Asymmetrical encryption algorithms use one key to encrypt data and a different key to decrypt data. One key is public and the other is private. In a public-key encryption system, any person can encrypt a message using the public key of the receiver, and the receiver is the only one that can decrypt it using his private key. They are more complex and are resource intensive and also slower to execute.
Types of Cryptography: The most common types of cryptography are block ciphers and stream ciphers. Each method differs in the way that it groups bits of data to encrypt it.
Block Ciphers: transform a fixed-length block of plaintext into a common block of ciphertext of 64 or 128 bits. Block size is the amount of data encrypted at any one time. To decrypt this ciphertext, apply the reverse transformation to the ciphertext block, using the same secret key. Block ciphers usually result in output data that is larger than the input data, because the ciphertext must be a multiple of the block size. Data Encryption Standard (DES) is a symmetric algorithm that encrypts blocks in 64-bit chunks using a 56-bit key. To accomplish this, the block algorithm takes data one chunk at a time, for example, 8 bytes per chunk, until the entire block is full. If there is less input data than one full block, the algorithm adds artificial data, or blanks, until it uses the full 64 bits.
Stream Ciphers: Unlike block ciphers, stream ciphers encrypt plaintext one byte or one bit at a time. With a stream cipher, the transformation of these smaller plaintext units varies, depending on when they are encountered during the encryption process. Stream ciphers can be much faster than block ciphers, and generally do not increase the message size, because they can encrypt an arbitrary number of bits. A5 is a stream cipher that provides voice privacy and encrypts cell phone communications. It is also possible to use DES in stream cipher mode. 
Symmetric Encryption Algorithm: Numerous encryption systems use symmetric encryption. Some of the common encryption standards that use symmetric encryption include the following:
3DES (Triple DES): Digital Encryption Standard (DES) is a symmetric block cipher with 64-bit block size that uses a 56-bit key. It takes a 64-bit block of plaintext as input and outputs a 64-bit block of ciphertext. It always operates on blocks of equal size and it uses both permutations and substitutions in the algorithm. A permutation is a way of arranging all elements of a set. Triple DES encrypts data three times and uses a different key for at least one of the three passes, giving it a cumulative key size of 112-168 bits. 3DES is resistant to attack, but it is much slower than DES.
The 3DES encryption cycle is as follows:
Data encrypted by first DES.
Data decrypted by second DES
Data re-encrypted by third DES.
The reverse process decrypts the ciphertext.
IDEA: The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) uses 64-bit blocks and 128-bit keys. IDEA performs eight rounds of transformations on each of the 16 blocks that results from dividing each 64-bit block. IDEA was the replacement for DES, and now PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) uses it. PGP is a program that provides privacy and authentication for data communication. GNU Privacy Guard (GPG) is a licensed, free version of PGP.
IDEA: The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) uses 64-bit blocks and 128-bit keys. IDEA performs eight rounds of transformations on each of the 16 blocks that results from dividing each 64-bit block. IDEA was the replacement for DES, and now PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) uses it. PGP is a program that provides privacy and authentication for data communication. GNU Privacy Guard (GPG) is a licensed, free version of PGP.
AES: The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) has a fixed block size of 128-bits with a key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) approved the AES algorithm in December 2001. The U.S. government uses AES to protect classified information.AES is a strong algorithm that uses longer key lengths. AES is faster than DES and 3DES, so it provides both a solution for software applications as well as hardware use in firewalls and routers.
Asymmetrical Encryption Process also called public-key encryption uses one key for encryption that is different from the key used for decryption.
Asymmetric Encryption Algorithms:Asymmetric algorithms use formulas that anyone can look up. The pair of unrelated keys is what makes these algorithms secure. The asymmetric algorithms include: 
RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) - uses the product of two very large prime numbers with an equal length of between 100 and 200 digits. Browsers use RSA to establish a secure connection.
Diffie-Hellman - provides an electronic exchange method to share the secret key. Secure protocols, such as Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), Transport Layer Security (TLS), Secure Shell (SSH), and Internet Protocol Security (IPsec), use Diffie-Hellman.
ElGamal - uses the U.S. government standard for digital signatures. This algorithm is free for use because no one holds the patent.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) - uses elliptic curves as part of the algorithm. In the U.S., the National Security Agency uses ECC for digital signature generation and key exchange.
Key Management: Key management includes the generation, exchange, storage, use, and replacement of keys used in an encryption algorithm. It is the most difficult part of designing a cryptosystem, the key management is usually the object of attack. The two terms used to describe keys are;
Key length: Also called the key size, this is the measure in bits.
Keyspace - This is the number of possibilities that a specific key length can generate.
As the key length increases, the key space increases exponentially. Longer keys are more secure and are also more resource intensive.
Key management considerations includes; Key Generation, Key Verification, Key Exchange, Key Storage, Key Lifetime, Key Revocation and Destruction.
Comparing Encryption Types: Symmetric encryption systems are more efficient and can handle more data. However, key management with symmetric encryption systems is more problematic and harder to manage. Asymmetric cryptography is more efficient at protecting the confidentiality of small amounts of data, and its size and speed make it more secure for tasks such as electronic key exchange which is a small amount of data rather than encrypting large blocks of data.
In the case of data in motion, use public key cryptography to exchange the secret key, and then symmetric cryptography to ensure the confidentiality of the data sent.
Symmetric algorithm is best known as shared secret key algorithm while asymmetric algorithm is best known as public key algorithms.
Symmetric usual key length is 80 to 256 bits while asymmetric key length is 512 to 4,096 bits.
In symmetric a sender and receiver must share a secret key while in asymmetric, a sender and receiver do not share a secret key.
Symmetric algorithm are usually quite fast(wire speed) because they are based on simple mathematical operations while asymmetric algorithm are relatively slow because they are based on difficult computational algorithm.
Examples of symmetric algorith includes DES, 3DES, AES, IDEA, RC2/4/5/6, and Blowfish while examples of asymmetric algorithm includes RSA, EIGamal, elliptic curves, and DH.
There are many application for both symmetric and asymmetric algorithms and they are:
A one-time password-generating token is a hardware device that uses cryptography to generate a one-time password, The electronic payment industry uses 3DES, Operating systems use DES to protect user files and system data with passwords, Most encrypting file systems, such as NTFS, use AES.
Four Protocols use asymmetric key algorithms and they are:
Internet Key Exchange (IKE), which is a fundamental component of IPsec Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), which is a means of implementing cryptography into a web browser.
Secure Shell (SSH), which is a protocol that provides a secure remote access connection to network devices.
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), which is a computer program that provides cryptographic privacy and authentication to increase the security of email communications.
VPNs use IPsec. IPsec is a suite of protocols developed to achieve secure services over networks. IPsec services allow for authentication, integrity, access control, and confidentiality. With IPsec, remote sites can exchange encrypted and verified information.
Data in use is a growing concern to many organizations. When in use, data no longer has any protection because the user needs to open and change the data. System memory holds data in use and it can contain sensitive data such as the encryption key. If criminals compromise data in use, they will have access to data at rest and data in motion.
Physical Access Controls: Physical access controls are actual barriers deployed to prevent direct contact with systems. The goal is to prevent unauthorized users from gaining physical access to facilities, equipment, and other organizational assets. They control who can enter or exit, where they can enter or exit, when they can enter or exit. Examples includes; Guards, Fences, Motion detectors, Laptop Locks, Locked doors, Swipe cards, Guard dogs, Video cameras, Mantraps and Alarms.
Logical Access Controls: Logical access controls are the hardware and software solutions used to manage access to resources and systems. These technology-based solutions include tools and protocols that computer systems use for identification,authentication,authorization, and accountability. They include the following;
Encryption is the process of taking plaintext and creating ciphertext.
Smart cards have an embedded microchip that can communicate with the host computer or card reader.
Passwords are protected string of characters used to authenticate a user.
Biometrics are users’ physical characteristics to verify their identity.
Access Control Lists (ACLs) define the type of traffic allowed on a network to meet specific security requirements.
Protocols are a set of rules that govern the exchange of data between devices.
Firewalls prevent unwanted network traffic.
Routers connect at least two networks with either a wired or wireless connection. They can function as the first and last line of defense for a network.
Intrusion Detection Systems(IDS) monitor a network for suspicious activities and also notification that an event occurred.
Clipping Levels are certain allowed thresholds for errors before triggering a red flag.
Administrative Access Controls: Administrative access controls are the policies and procedures defined by organizations to implement and enforce all aspects of controlling unauthorized access. They focus on personnel and business practices. Administrative controls include:
Policies are statements of intent.
Procedures are the detailed steps required to perform an activity.
Hiring practices involves the steps an organization takes to find qualified employees.
Background checks are an employment screening that includes information of past employment verification, credit history, and criminal history.
Data classification categorizes data based on its sensitivity.
Security training educates employees about the security policies at an organization.
Reviews evaluate an employee’s job performance.
Mandatory Access Control(MAC):Mandatory access control (MAC) restricts the actions that a subject can perform on an object. A subject can be a user or a process. An object can be a file, a port, or an input/output device. An authorization rule enforces whether or not a subject can access the object. 
Discretionary Access Control(DAC): DAC grants or restricts object access determined by the object’s owner. As the name implies, controls are discretionary because an object owner with certain access permissions can pass on those permissions to another subject. In systems that employ discretionary access controls, the owner of an object can decide which subjects can access that object and what specific access they may have. Permissions is a common way to achieve this, the owner of a file can specify what permissions(read/write/execute) other users may have.
Another common mechanism is Access control list, it uses rules to determine what traffic can enter or exit a network.
Role-Based Access Control(RBAC): Specific roles require permissions to perform certain operations. Users acquire permissions through their role. RBAC can work in combination with DAC or MAC by enforcing the policies of either one. RBAC helps to implement security administration in large organizations with hundreds of users and thousands of possible permissions. Organizations widely accept the use of RBAC to manage computer permissions within a system, or application, as a best practice.
Rule-Based Access Control: Rule-based access control uses access control lists (ACLs) to help determine whether to grant access.  The determination of whether to grant access depends on these rules.Organizations can combine rule-based access control with other strategies for implementing access restrictions. For example, MAC methods can utilize a rule-based approach for implementation.
Identification enforces the rules established by the authorization policy. A unique identifier ensures the proper association between allowed activities and subjects. A username is the most common method used to identify a user. A username can be an alphanumeric combination, a personal identification number (PIN), a smart card, or biometric, such as a fingerprint, retina scan, or voice recognition. It ensures that a system can identify each user individually; therefore, allowing an authorized user to perform the appropriate actions on a particular resource. 
Cybersecurity policies determine which identification controls should be used. The sensitivity of the information and information systems determine how stringent the controls. 
What You Know: Passwords, passphrases, or PINs are all examples of something that the user knows. They are the most popular method used for authentication. A number of publications recommend that a password be at least eight characters. Users should not create a password that is so long that it is difficult to memorize, or conversely, so short that it becomes vulnerable to password cracking. Passwords should contain a combination of upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters. Users need to use different passwords for different systems because if a criminal cracks the user’s password once, the criminal will have access to all of a user’s accounts. 
What You Have: Smart cards and security key fobs are both examples of something that users have in their possession.  Smart cards provide authentication and encryption to keep data safe. A security key fob is a device that is small enough to attach to a key ring. It uses a process called two-factor authentication, which is more secure than a username and password combination.
Who You Are: A unique physical characteristic, such as a fingerprint, retina, or voice, that identifies a specific user is called biometrics. Biometric security compares physical characteristics against stored profiles to authenticate users. They are two types of biometric identifiers and they are;
Physiological characteristics – these include fingerprints, DNA, face, hands, retina, or ear features.
Behavioral characteristics - include patterns of behavior, such as gestures, voice, typing rhythm, or the way a user walks
Multi-Factor Authentication: Multi-factor authentication uses at least two methods of verification. A security key fob is a good example. The two factors are something you know, such as a password, and something you have, such as a security key fob. Take this a step further by adding something you are, such as a fingerprint scan. Another example is withdrawing cash from an ATM. In this case, bank card and the PIN is needed before cash can be dispensed.
Authorization controls what a user can and cannot do on the network after successful authentication. After a user proves his or her identity, the system checks to see what network resources the user can access and what the user can do with the resources. It answers the question of what Read, Copy, Create, and Delete privileges does the user have?
Authorization uses a set of attributes that describes the user’s access to the network. The system compares these attributes to the information contained within the authentication database, determines a set of restrictions for that user, and delivers it to the local router where the user is connected. Authorization is automatic and does not require users to perform additional steps after authentication. Implement authorization immediately after the user authenticates.
Defining authorization rules is the first step in controlling access. An authorization policy establishes these rules.
A group membership policy defines authorization based on membership in a specific group.
An authority-level policy defines access permissions based on an employee’s standing within the organization. 
Accountability traces an action back to a person or process making the change to a system, collects this information, and reports the usage data. The organization can use this data for such purposes as auditing or billing. The collected data might include the log in time for a user, whether the user log in was a success or failure, or what network resources the user accessed. This allows an organization to trace actions, errors, and mistakes during an audit or investigation.
Implementing accountability consists of technologies, policies, procedures, and education. The organization’s policies and procedures spell out what actions should be recorded and how the log files are generated, reviewed and stored. Many laws require the implementation of measures to secure different data types. These laws guide an organization on the right way to handle, store, and dispose of data. The education and awareness of an organization’s policies, procedures, and related laws can also contribute to accountability.
Preventive Controls: Prevent means to keep something from happening. Preventive access controls stop unwanted or unauthorized activity from happening.For an authorized user, a preventive access control means restrictions. Assigning user specific privileges on a system is an example of a preventive control. A firewall that blocks access to a port or service that cyber criminals can exploit is also a preventive control.
Deterrent Controls: A deterrent is the opposite of a reward. Access control deterrents discourage cyber criminals from gaining unauthorized access to information systems and sensitive data. Access control deterrents discourage attacking systems, stealing data, or spreading malicious code. Organizations use access control deterrents to enforce cybersecurity policies. Examples of Deterrent Access Control includes; Locks, Fences, Badges, Guards, Mantraps, Cameras, Intrusion Alarms, Separation of Duties, Awareness Training, Encryption, Auditing and Firewalls.
Detective Controls: Detection is the act or process of noticing or discovering something. Access control detections identify different types of unauthorized activity. All detective systems have several things in common; they look for unusual or prohibited activity. They also provide methods to record or alert system operators of potential unauthorized access. Detective controls do not prevent anything from happening; they are more of an after-the-fact measure. Examples of Detective Access Control; Job rotation, Mandatory vacation, Audit trails, Intrusion Detection Systems, Honey pots, Review security camera events, Motion detectors, Guard dogs, security guards.
Corrective Controls: Corrective controls restore the system back to a state of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. They can also restore systems to normal after unauthorized activity occurs. Corrective counteracts something that is undesirable. Organizations put corrective access controls in place after a system experiences a threat. Examples includes; Intrusion detection system, mantraps, Business continuity planning, Antivirus, Alarms, Security policies.
Recovery Controls: Recovery access controls restore resources, functions, and capabilities after a violation of a security policy. Recovery controls can repair damage, in addition to stopping any further damage. These controls have more advanced capabilities over corrective access controls. Examples includes; Backup/Restore operations, Fault tolerance drive systems, Server clustering, Database shadowing, Antivirus software.
Compensative Controls: Compensative access controls provide options to other controls to bolster enforcement in support of a security policy. A compensative control can also be a substitution used in place of a control that is not possible under the circumstances. For example, an organization may not be able to have a guard dog, so instead it deploys a motion detector with a spotlight and a barking sound. Examples include; Security policy, Personnel supervision, Monitoring, Work Task procedures.
Data masking technology secures data by replacing sensitive information with a non-sensitive version. The non-sensitive version looks and acts like the original.  In the most common use case, masking limits the propagation of sensitive data within IT systems by distributing surrogate data sets for testing and analysis.
Data masking can replace sensitive data in non-production environments to protect the underlying information. There are several data masking techniques that can ensure that data remains meaningful but changed enough to protect it. They are;
Substitution replaces data with authentic looking values to apply anonymity to the data records.
Shuffling derives a substitution set from the same column of data that a user wants to mask. This technique works well for financial information in a test database, for example.
Nulling out applies a null value to a particular field, which completely prevents visibility of the data.
Steganography conceals data (the message) in another file such as a graphic, audio, or other text file. The advantage of steganography over cryptography is that the secret message does not attract any special attention. No one would ever know that a picture actually contained a secret message by viewing the file either electronically or in hard copy.
There are several components involved in hiding data. First, there is the embedded data, which is the secret message. The cover-text (or cover-image or cover-audio) hides the embedded data producing the stego-text (or stego-image or stego-audio). A stego-key controls the hiding process.
Steganography Techniques: The approach used to embed data in a cover-image is using Least Significant Bits (LSB).  This method uses bits of each pixel in the image. A pixel is the basic unit of programmable color in a computer image. The specific color of a pixel is a blend of three colors—red, green, and blue (RGB). Three bytes of data specify a pixel’s color (one byte for each color). Eight bits make up a byte. A 24-bit color system uses all three bytes. LSB uses a bit of each of the red, green, and blue color components. Each pixel can store 3 bits. On average, not more than half of the bits in an image will need to change to hide a secret message effectively.
Social steganography hides information in plain sight by creating a message that can be read a certain way by some to get the message.  Others who view it in a normal way will not see the message. Teens on social media use this tactic to communicate with their closest friends while keeping others, like their parents, unaware of what the message actually means. For example, the phrase “going to the movies” might mean “going to the beach”. Individuals in countries that censor media also use social steganography to get their messages out by misspelling words on purpose or making obscure references. In effect, they communicate to different audiences simultaneously.
Steganalysis is the discovery that hidden information exists. The goal of steganalysis is to discover the hidden information. Disk analysis utilities can report on hidden information in unused clusters of storage devices. Filters can capture data packets that contain hidden information in packet headers. Both of these methods are using steganography signatures.
Data obfuscation is the use and practice of data masking and steganography techniques in the cybersecurity and cyber intelligence profession. Obfuscation is the art of making the message confusing, ambiguous, or harder to understand.
Software watermarking protects software from unauthorized access or modification. Software watermarking inserts a secret message into the program as proof of ownership. The secret message is the software watermark. If someone tries to remove the watermark, the result is nonfunctional code.
Software obfuscation translates software into a version equivalent to the original but one that is harder for attackers to analyze. Trying to reverse engineer the software gives unintelligible results from software that still functions.